# Protocol v2.0

## Client

Minimal client protocol version: `2.0`

## Statement

=== Client statement

+++ JSON

```json5
{
  // Version of API (not protocol)
  "api": 0,
  // Client local time in ms
  "clientTime": 16500123000,
  // Which format to use for object encoding: JSON | YAML | TOML
  "schemeFormat": "JSON",
  // Compression algorithms, supported on client side: gzip | zlib
  "compressors": [
    "gzip",
    "zlib"
  ],
  // Optional. compressors[0] used by default
  "defaultCompression": "zlib",
}
```

+++ YAML

```yaml
api: 0
clientTime: 16500123000
schemeFormat: JSON
compressors:
  - gzip
  - zlib
defaultCompression: zlib
```

+++ TOML

```toml
api = 0.0
clientTime = 16500123000.0
schemeFormat = "JSON"
compressors = [
  "gzip",
  "zlib"
]
defaultCompression = "zlib"
```

+++

=== Server statement

+++ JSON

```json5
{
  // Server local time in ms [UTC]
  "serverTime": 165000123000,
}
```

+++ YAML

```yaml
serverTime: 165000123000
```

+++ TOML

```toml
serverTime = 165000123000.0
```

+++

===

## Actions

### `0x00` Action

Common request/response action.

#### Structure

[!button icon="package" variant="contrast" corners="square" text="Head" margin="0 4 4 0"]
[!button icon="package" variant="contrast" corners="square" text="Headers" margin="0 4 4 0"]
[!button icon="package" variant="contrast" corners="square" text="Payload" margin="0 4 4 0"]

`Action` consists of:

+ `HEAD`: 18 bytes
+ `HEADERS + SEPARATOR + PAYLOAD`: `HEAD.data_len` bytes

Where SEPARATOR is `00 00` (two empty bytes)

#### Head

+ **Handler ID**: `uInt2` - [Endpoint ID](#endpoints) - treat as URL alternative
+ **Message ID**: `uInt2` - [Message ID](#message-id)
+ **Send Time**: `uInt8` - Client send time in ms
+ **Data Type**: `uInt1` - What [type](#data-types) **PAYLOAD** is
+ **Compression**: `uInt1` - What compression was used on **PAYLOAD**
+ **Data Len**: `uInt4` - Length of **HEADERS** + **HEADER_SEPARATOR** + **PAYLOAD**

#### Headers

Message header works like in HTTP: It contains META information that can be used at protocol level to change up server
behavior w/o changing business logic.

Message header is a simple `UTF-8` encoded JSON (YAML or TOML) dictionary followed by two empty bytes `00 00`

**Request only Headers**

- `"Offset": int` [1] - tells the server to skip N amount of first bytes of `<Data>` section

**Response only Headers**

There are no response-only header currently supported

**Common Headers**

- `"Files": [{"key": str, "name": str, "size": int, "type": str?}]` [1] - This header is being used when `<Data Type>`
  in packet header is set to `FILES - 0x02`
- `"Status": int` - HTTP Status code analog. Usually only used by a server to show client if there was any error or not.

> **[1]** Using "Offset" header for the handler that returns `FILES` will also decrease "size" fields in "Files" response header.
> If "size" will drop to zero, then file won't appear in "Files" header.

#### Payload

Whatever `Handler` accepts/returns

### `0x01` StreamAction

Common request/response streaming action. Basically same as `Action`

#### Structure

[!button icon="package" variant="contrast" corners="square" text="Head" margin="0 4 4 0"]
[!button icon="package" variant="contrast" corners="square" text="Headers" margin="0 4 4 0"]
[!button icon="package" variant="contrast" corners="square" text="Payload" margin="0 4 4 0"]

`StreamAction` consists of:

+ `HEAD`: 14 bytes
+ `Headers size`: 4 bytes
+ `HEADERS`: Headers size
+ `PAYLOAD`: multiple parts (optional)
  + `Payload part size`: 4 bytes
  + `Payload part`
+ `END`: 4 empty bytes

Client should read payload until `payload part size` is `00 00 00 00` (4 empty bytes), then stop.

!!!
Compression of `StreamAction` applies on each part separately, where Codec applies on the whole decompressed payload.
!!!

#### Head

+ **Handler ID**: `uInt2` - [Endpoint ID](#endpoints) - treat as URL alternative
+ **Message ID**: `uInt2` - [Message ID](#message-id)
+ **Send Time**: `uInt8` - Client send time in ms
+ **Data Type**: `uInt1` - What [type](#data-types) **PAYLOAD** and **HEADERS** are
+ **Compression**: `uInt1` - What compression was used on **PAYLOAD** and **HEADERS**

### `0x02` InputAction

Small version of `Action`, that is initially sent by server to [ask client for more data](#inputs), when handling
request.

Client must send `InputAction` back to server with requested information (or empty) to continue.

`InputAction` may come to client multiple times during single request

#### Structure

[!button icon="package" variant="contrast" corners="square" text="Head" margin="0 4 4 0"]
[!button icon="package" variant="contrast" corners="square" text="Headers" margin="0 4 4 0"]
[!button icon="package" variant="contrast" corners="square" text="Payload" margin="0 4 4 0"]

`InputAction` consists of:

+ `HEAD`: 8 bytes
+ `HEADERS + SEPARATOR + PAYLOAD`: `HEAD.data_len` bytes

Where SEPARATOR is `00 00` (two empty bytes)

#### Head

+ **Message ID**: `uInt2` - [Message ID](#message-id)
+ **Data Type**: `uInt1` - What [type](#data-types) **PAYLOAD**
+ **Compression**: `uInt1` - What compression was used on **PAYLOAD**
+ **Data Len**: `uInt4` - Length of **HEADERS** + **HEADER_SEPARATOR** + **PAYLOAD**

### `0x05` DownloadSpeed

Separate action, that tells server to set `send` rate to specific `bps` limit.

!!!
Server won't reply to this action, but will acknowledge nonetheless
!!!

#### Structure

[!button icon="package" variant="contrast" corners="square" text="Head" margin="0 4 4 0"]

`DownloadSpeedAction` consists of:

+ `HEAD`: 4 bytes

#### Head

+ **Download speed**: `uInt4` - Amount of bytes server is allowed to send per second

### `0x06` CancelInput

Separate action, that tells server to stop waiting for answer to `InputAction`. Used instead of `Input` response.

!!!
Server will reply to this action, with basic `Action` or `StreamAction`
!!!

#### Structure

[!button icon="package" variant="contrast" corners="square" text="Head" margin="0 4 4 0"]

`CancelInputAction` consists of:

+ `HEAD`: 2 bytes

#### Head

+ **Message ID**: `uInt2` - [Message ID](#message-id) - message_id of request that is being processed by server

### `0xFF` PingPong

Separate action, that tells server that client is still alive. Server will respond with same action, but updated send
time.

#### Structure

[!button icon="package" variant="contrast" corners="square" text="Head" margin="0 4 4 0"]

`PingAction` consists of:

+ `HEAD`: 8 bytes

#### Head

+ **Send Time**: `uInt8` - Client send time in ms

## Endpoints

In HTTP servers, endpoints are functions, that are located with `method: GET|POST|etc.` and `URL: https://...`.

In **CATS** we use `uInt2` ID to locate endpoints.

Endpoints are triggered with `Action` and `StreamAction` messages, and they can ask issuer for additional info
using [Inputs](#inputs)

## Inputs

Inputs - is a mechanism that lets the server ask client for additional information. They also may be used to send
partial data on client **on demand**

Instead of client sending the request first, inputs are sent firstly by server.

Inputs will convey same **Message ID** as client's request.

## Broadcast

If you want to send a client an action, but don't want to wait for request, you can send it as usual reply, but with a
different **Message ID**.

Broadcasts are one-sided, so client don't need to reply on it. Client
should [subscribe](../client/connection.md#subscribe) (locally) on broadcast in order to handle them, otherwise they
will be silently dropped.

## Message ID

Message ID - is `uInt2` random number, generated by sending party. It is used to track `request-response`
and [`inputs`](#inputs).

+ Message ID must be unique for active requests
+ Message ID must be `0x0000` to `0x7FFF` for `request-reply` scenario
+ Message ID must be `0x8000` to `0xFFFF` for `broadcast/publish` scenario
+ You may use increment counter or RNG to generator Message ID
+ Response will contain the same `Message ID` as request

## Data Types

### `0x00` Binary

Plain byte buffer, how to use/parse it, should be described in [API endpoint](#endpoints) description

### `0x01` Scheme

JSON (YAML or TOML) encoded object. Which format is used declared at [initialisation stage](index.md#initialisation)

### `0x02` Files

One or multiple files, concatenated together in a single byte buffer. Information about their respective sizes, names,
formats, etc. is located in **HEADERS**

+++ JSON

```json5 Headers
{
  // List of files (order is same as byte buffers in payload) 
  "Files": [
    {
      // Hashmap key, may equal to name
      "key": "avatar", 
      // Selected file name
      "name": "Anakin.jpg",
      // Size of byte buffer, that went into payload
      "size": 51231, 
      // MIME (optional)
      "type": "image/jpeg",
    },
    // ... more files
  ]
}
```

+++ YAML

```yaml Headers
Files:
  - key: avatar
    name: Anakin.jpg
    size: 51231
    type: image/jpeg
```

+++ TOML

```toml Headers
[[Files]]
key = "avatar"
name = "Anakin.jpg"
size = 51231.0
type = "image/jpeg"
```

+++

!!!
If payload was cut with `Offset` header, `Files[n].size` will be reduced as well.
!!!

### `0x03` Byte Scheme

Custom data scheme, encoded in plain bytes (like [action head](#head))

## Handshake

Handshake allows server to verify that client is some-what official.

1. Client send `N bytes` to server
2. Server verifies it
3. If handshake is OK, server send `01` to client
4. If handshake is NO, server send `00` to client and abort connection

### Handshake: SHA256

SHA256 handshake is, as name suggests, just a sha256 hash comparison. It is time-bound, so old hashes won't work, but
still have time window of ±10 seconds for connection latency check.

SHA256 is calculated from combined bytes of:

+ `SECRET_KEY` - secret symmetric key that is set by server and must be present at client
+ `TIME` - decimal string representation of time encoded in bytes (`UTF-8` as always)

TIME - is a string of decimal integer, with last digit set to 0. Time used on client must take difference between local
and server one into account.

Hence, `server_time` sent by server in [**statement**](#statement) can be used to calculate actual server time.

!!!
SHA256 should be sent in pure 32 bytes, no need to convert to HEX string, and then encode to UTF-8 byte buffer, etc.
!!!
